= Using Nice-FFI

This is a guide on how to use Nice-FFI's features. It assumes that you
are already somewhat familiar with Ruby-FFI.


== NiceFFI::Library

NiceFFI::Library is a drop-in replacement for FFI::Library. It provides
improved library finding abilities and support for TypedPointer return
types for attached functions.


In fact, NiceFFI::Library *is* FFI::Library, but with a few extras.
That means that you can do all the regular FFI::Library stuff as well
as the stuff described here.


=== load_library

NiceFFI::Library.load_library is a more convenient replacement for
FFI::Library.ffi_lib. It uses NiceFFI::PathSet to search for the
library in the most likely places, depending on the user's operating
system. For example, on Linux it would look for "lib[NAME].so" in
"/usr/lib/" (among others), while on Windows it would look for
"[NAME].dll" in "C:\windows\system32\".

Using load_library is easy. Just use "extend NiceFFI::Library" instead
of "extend FFI::Library", and use "load_library" instead of "ffi_lib":

  
  require 'nice-ffi'
  
  module MyLibraryModule
    extend NiceFFI::Library
  
    load_library("SDL")  # look for libSDL.so, SDL.dll, etc.
  
    # structs, functions, etc. as usual.
  
  end
  

==== Advanced load_library

As mentioned, load_library uses NiceFFI::PathSet to search for the
library in likely directories. Specifically, it looks for:

  
  paths = {
    /linux|bsd/  => [ "/usr/local/lib/",
                      "/usr/lib/" ],
  
    /darwin/     => [ "/usr/local/lib/",
                      "/sw/lib/",
                      "/opt/local/lib/",
                      "~/Library/Frameworks/",
                      "/Library/Frameworks/" ],
  
    /windows/    => [ "C:\\windows\\system32\\",
                      "C:\\windows\\system\\" ]
  }
  
  files = {
    /linux|bsd/  => [ "lib[NAME].so*",
                      "lib[NAME]-*.so*" ],
  
    /darwin/     => [ "lib[NAME].dylib",
                      "lib[NAME]-*.dylib",
                      "[NAME].framework/[NAME]" ],
  
    /windows/    => [ "[NAME].dll",
                      "[NAME]-*.dll"]
  }
  
  NiceFFI::PathSet::DEFAULT = NiceFFI::PathSet.new( paths, files )
  

The paths hash tells PathSet where to look for libraries, and the
files hash tells it the format of the library filename itself. The
string "[NAME]" is replaced with whatever string you pass to
load_library.

Each key in the hash should be a Regexp that matches an OS name from
FFI::Platform::OS. As of this writing (October 2009), the list of
recognized OS names is:

* "darwin" (MacOS X)
* "freebsd"
* "linux"
* "openbsd"
* "solaris"
* "windows"

So, if the user is running Linux and you try to load "SDL", it will
first look for "/usr/local/lib/libSDL.so". If it can't find that, it
will then look for "/usr/lib/libSDL.so". It would also use those same
paths for FreeBSD or OpenBSD, because those OS names also match the
regexp /linux|bsd/.

If the library could not be found in any of the given directories with
the given file name formats, load_library will just try loading "SDL"
using ffi_lib (which does some platform-appropriate guesses too). If
that fails too, LoadError is raised.

If you want to load from a different path, you can make a custom
PathSet and pass it to load_library:

  
  libs_dir = File.dirname(__FILE__) + "/libs/"
  
  pathset = NiceFFI::PathSet::DEFAULT.prepend( libs_dir )
  
  load_library( "SDL", my_pathset )
  

The above example prepends (adds in front) the new paths so
that load_library will look for the library in "./libs/" first.
See PathSet for other useful methods for modifying PathSets.


Another advanced usage tip: If a library has several alternative
names, you can provide an Array of names:

  
  # It might be called "foo", "foo2", or "Foo".
  
  load_library( ["foo", "foo2", "Foo"] )
  

=== attach_function

NiceFFI::Library#attach_function behaves similarly to
FFI::Library#attach_function, except it supports TypedPointer return
values. For example, suppose you have a C function:

  
  MyStruct *make_my_struct( int x, int y );
  

This returns a pointer to an instance of MyStruct. With FFI, you'd
write this to attach it:

  
  attach_function :make_my_struct, [:int, :int], :pointer
  

And when you called it, it would return an FFI::Pointer, which you
would then have to manually wrap every time you called the method:

  
  ptr = make_my_struct( 1, 2 )
  mystruct = MyStruct.new( ptr )
  

With TypedPointer, the wrapping happens automatically. Just attach
the function with a TypedPointer instead of :pointer:

  
  attach_function :make_my_struct, [:int, :int], NiceFFI::TypedPointer( MyStruct )
  
  # If MyStruct is based on NiceFFI::Struct, you can do this instead:
  
  attach_function :make_my_struct, [:int, :int], MyStruct.typed_pointer


Then you automatically get a MyStruct instance when you call the function:

  
  mystruct = make_my_struct( 1, 2 )
  mystruct.instance_of?( MyStruct )   # =>  Heck yeah it sure is!
  

Voila!


== NiceFFI::Struct

NiceFFI::Struct is a replacement for FFI::Struct. It provides several
features in addition to the normal FFI::Struct behavior:

* Ability to construct new instances from Array, Hash, another instance,
  or a pointer as usual.
* Automatic read and write accessors for struct members.
* Accessors for struct pointer members with TypedPointer.
* Ability to dump an instance as an Array (#to_ary) or Hash (#to_hash).
* Pretty and useful #to_s and #inspect for debugging.


=== Constructors

NiceFFI::Struct allows you to construct a new struct instance from
a Hash, Array, or another existing instance of the same struct type.
It can also accept a pointer, just as with FFI::Struct.

  
  class MyStruct < NiceFFI::Struct
    layout :x, :int,
           :y, :int
  end

  mystruct  = MyStruct.new( {:x => 1, :y => 2} )  # from Hash
  mystruct2 = MyStruct.new( [1,2] )               # from Array
  mystruct3 = MyStruct.new( mystruct )            # from another instance
  mystruct4 = MyStruct.new( ptr )                 # from Pointer
  

=== Struct Member Accessors

Struct members are defined automatically when you use
NiceFFI::Struct.layout:

  
  class MyStruct < NiceFFI::Struct
    layout :x, :int,
           :y, :int
  end

  mystruct = MyStruct.new({:x => 1, :y => 2})

  mystruct.x  # => 1
  mystruct.y  # => 2

  mystruct.x =  3
  mystruct.y = -4
  

Sometimes a struct will have members that should be read-only,
or completely hidden. In those cases, you can use 
NiceFFI::Struct.read_only and NiceFFI::Struct.hidden.

  
  class MySneakyStruct < NiceFFI::Struct
    layout :readme,  :int,
           :readme2, :int,
           :hideme,  :pointer,
           :hideme2, :pointer,
           :normal,  :uint32
  
    read_only :readme, :readme2
    hidden    :hideme, :hideme2
  end
  
  sneaky = MySneakyStruct.new( ... )
  

read_only prevents a write accessor from being created (or removes
it if there is already one). hidden does the same, but for both
read and write accessors. hidden also prevents the member from
being shown in #to_s and #inspect.

read_only and hidden can go before or after layout (or both),
and you can safely call them multiple times if you need to.


=== TypedPointer Struct Member Accessors

Some struct members are :pointers that point to other structs.
With FFI::Struct, you'd have to manually wrap and unwrap the
struct pointer, but if you specify a TypedPointer instead of
:pointer, NiceFFI::Struct will wrap and unwrap it automatically:

  
  class StructWithPtr < NiceFFI::Struct
    layout :x,  :int,
           :y,  :int,
           :my, NiceFFI::TypedPointer( MyStruct )
  end
  
  struct = StructWithPtr.new( :x  => -1,
                              :y  => -2,
                              :my => MyStruct.new([1,2]) )
  
  # Seamlessly wraps the pointer in a struct
  struct.my.kind_of? MyStruct           # true
  
  # Seamlessly unwraps the struct and stores the pointer  
  struct.my = MyStruct.new([-4,-3])
  

=== Automatic Memory Managment

Ruby-FFI already provides automatic memory management when you create
a FFI::MemoryPointer or FFI::Buffer instance. When those instances are
garbage collected, their memory is automatically released so it can be
used elsewhere.

That feature is used by NiceFFI::Struct when you create a new instance
by passing a Hash, Array, String, or another instance. In those cases,
new memory is allocated for the struct instance, and automatically
released when the struct instance is galbage collected.

NiceFFI::Struct also provides an optional automatic memory management
system for normal pointers. To use this system, define a "release"
class method in your class. Then if you create a new struct instance
with an FFI::Pointer, the release class method will automatically be
called when the memory for a struct instance needs to be freed.

(This also applies to attached functions with TypedPointer return
values. The pointers returned from those functions are wrapped in the
struct class, so if you have defined the release class method, they
will be automatically memory managed.)

The release class method must accept an FFI::Pointer and call an
appropriate function to free the struct's memory. Here's an example
from Ruby-SDL-FFI:

  
  class Surface < NiceFFI::Struct
  
    def self.release( pointer )
      SDL.FreeSurface( pointer )
    end
  
    # ...
  
  end
  

Note: the release class method should not have any side effects
besides freeing the struct's memory. Don't be clever!

The memory management system keeps a reference count for each pointer
address, so the release class method will only be called when all
struct instances that are using that memory have been garbage
collected. That means it's safe to have many instances sharing the
same memory.

If you want to create an instance that doesn't use the memory
management system, you can disable the :autorelease option when
creating the instance, like so:

  
  struct = MyStructClass.new( a_pointer, :autorelease => false )
  

== NiceFFI::OpaqueStruct

Some C libraries have structs with no publicly-visible layout.
Instead, the internal details are hidden, and only modified by calling
functions in the library.

For example, the SDL_mixer library has this definition in its header
file:

  
  typedef struct _Mix_Music Mix_Music;
  

"_Mix_Music" is a struct that is defined within SDL_mixer, but its
internals are different depending on what features SDL_mixer was
compiled with. The struct members are not revealed in the header file,
so they can't be accessed like a normal struct.

NiceFFI provides a class for handling special cases like this,
NiceFFI::OpaqueStruct. OpaqueStruct has no layout and no members, and
cannot be created by passing in Hashes, Arrays, etc. It simply holds a
pointer to the struct memory. As with NiceStruct (and FFI::Struct),
instances of OpaqueStruct-based classes can be passed directly to
functions expecting a pointer of the appropriate struct type.

OpaqueStruct features the same optional memory management system as
NiceStruct. Read the "Automatic Memory Management" section above for
information about how to use this feature.
